# Markov-Distinction
Gannon Leech
Mission 3: A Markov Distinction for Computational Creativity

Title: 2304 Shades of RGB

Description: This artwork starts by drawing a square that is filled by a random color generated by choosing three numbers between 0 and 255 as the red, green, and blue values for the color. The program then continues drawing squares in rows, but the color changes for each square based on a Markov Chain transition matrix. This matrix is 255 x 255, where the probability from one value between 0 and 255 is highest to remain close to that value. Therefore, I was hoping to be able to see some gradients of smoothness in the image, as consecutive squares should be relatively smooth, but this ended up being more challenging than I thought, which I will discuss more in the Challenges section.

How to run: You only need to run the file. The code will execute and prompt you to input a power to raise the difference of each state to, which is explained later in this readme. Then once you enter a value it will run and an image will pop up on your screen, which you are able to save if you would like.

Meaningful: I think this is artwork is meaningful because I appreciate the mix between what seems like randomness and what is expected. When I first was planning to do the mission in this way, I expected that there would be a somewhat smooth gradient from the first square through the rows, where every once and a while there would be a large jump in the color. However, what I realized in doing this is that there is much more randomness in the changes and there are many more big jumps in colors than areas of similar colors. I still appreciate seeing the randomness reflected on the image, and after looking at the different ways of setting up the transition matrix, I personally like the artwork from the more random matrix than the more ordered matrix.

I think what is coolest about this project is watching how the result changes as you increase the weight given to being close verses far from the current color. The way I accounted for distance from current value for a single color was by calculating Absolute Value(255 Ð (row_index Ð column_index)). This way, if the current value for red was 100, then the highest weight would be to stay at that value for red: Abs(255 Ð (100 Ð 100)) = 255. However, it would only be 254 for going to 101 or 99, so there was not a huge advantage given to staying the same color. When I first ran it, I could see that it was mostly random, however there were definitely areas where there were consecutive squares with very similar colors. I tried to decrease the amount of variability, by including an input for a power for the absolute value calculation to be raised to, which would reward higher values more, leading to higher probabilities for the colors to stay similar. By the time the power was 5, there was a much clearer gradient for each row, and the colors remained similar for much of the row. I think this made me appreciate the versions with power = 1 more, because at first it looks like a very random series of colors, but if you look closer, you can see different parts where three or four squares in a row are very similar, and you can realize that that is from the transition matrix and the higher probabilities.

Challenging: I think the most challenging part of this program for me was to set up the transition matrix, and then looking at different ways of increasing or decreasing the randomness in the system. When I first tried to make the matrix, I was not sure how to handle a 255 x 255 matrix, and how to ensure that the probabilities would reflect what I wanted them to reflect, which is that the higher probabilities are for the numbers closest to the number it is at, and they get lower as the distance increases. While I ended up deciding on the method I described before, I tried different ways to simplify it, thinking of doing 255 mod a number, which would leave me with a smaller range, however I realized that would also lead to much less of a transition between squares, because numbers that are very close to each other from 0 Ð 255, may end up being far when you take the mod, ie 25 is just 1 away from 26, but mod 26, 25 = 25 and 26 = 0, which would not have the desired effect. This meant I had to try to figure out a way to create the 255 x 255 matrix, which I was able to do after some different attempts.

I think some next steps moving forward would be to try to smooth the change from row to row. When the program finishes drawing a row of squares, it considers the color of the last square in the previous row when using the transition matrix to select the next color. This means that the first square of a new row may not look related at all to the square above it. A future change could be to try to draw the squares snaking around each row, instead of always starting from the left side, which could make the rows more similar as the following row would start below the square its color is based off of, meaning that it likely would be more similar in color to it. 

Creativity: I think that the artwork produced by my markov artist should be considered creative. It is certainly personally creative, as the artwork is new to me. And it is likely that each individual piece is historically creative, due to the permutations of so many squares with three different values between 0 and 255. Even if I was not the first person to come up with the idea, the individual creation is likely unique. I think it is also creative in the sense that it explores how different the ranges of colors and puts in contrast both colors that are very similar to each other, but then every so often there are colors that are very dissimilar next to each other.

Acknowledgements: I used this article to help me with using the ImageDraw class to draw the squares and show the image: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python-pil-imagedraw-draw-rectangle/

